
1   
ACHILLEA MILLEFOLIUM
“Yarrow”
 
Family:    Asteraceae / Compositae
 
Active Constituents:    Contains more than 100 biologically active compounds including volatile oils (pinenes, camphor, cineole), sesquterpenes lactone, flavonoids, alkaloids, thujone, coumarins.
 
 
Habitat:   Grows in meadows and along roadsides, spreads via roots.
 
Origin:   Native to Eurasia and naturalized in North America, Australia, and New Zealand, found in Temperate Zones throughout the world.
 
Parts Used:   Leaves and other aerial parts.
 
 
Uses:   Tea is used for colds, coronary thrombosis, cystitis, diarrhea, dysmenorrheal, eczema, enteritis, flatulence, fever, flu, gastritis, hemorrhage, internal bleeding, placenta delivery, postpartum hemorrhage, rheumatism, shigella.  Topically, as a poultice, its styptic and hemostatic properties have been used for wounds and haemorrhaging, haemorrhoids, nosebleeds and varicose veins.
In Homeopathy, Yarrow is used for spontaneous or traumatic haemorrhages of bright red blood from any location, especially post-partum haemorrhage, bleeding haemorrhoids, and nosebleed.
 
Herba Militaris is one of my most common names.  I was used to staunch war wounds in 1200 BC.  My Latin name honors Achilles who used the flowers to heal his wounded soldiers.  I can also be grown in gardens to keep plants disease resistant.  The Druids used my stems as a guide to foretell the weather, and my stalks have been used to cast the I Ching.


2    
ACONITUM NAPELLUS
 
“Monkshood” “Aconite”
 
Family:    Ranunculaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Terpenoid alkaloids (aconitine), nor-diterpene alkaloids, sparteine and ephedrine, sugars, fat and resin.
 
 
Habitat:   Found in mountain areas of Europe all the way to the Himalayas.  Grows wild in mountain woods, dam grasslands, and moors in the Southern parts of central Europe.
 
Origin:   Ancient in India or China, and appeared later in the western world.
 
Parts Used:   Root
 
 
Uses:   Aconite is most used in Homeopathy, where it is an extremely important remedy for acute conditions such as croup, sore throat, otitis and influenza.  Along with Belladonna it is a top remedy needed for high fevers of infancy and childhood.  It is especially indicated in acute conditions which come on suddenly after a chill, and which are accompanied by anxiety or fear. 
Historically, used for diaphoresis, facial paralysis and neuralgia, muscular and joint pain, gout, rheumatism, and sciatica.
 
Aconite has been used throughout history by hunters to poison arrow tips; and to eliminate “senile persons of no value to the state” on the ancient isle of Ceos. It’s root is so toxic that 3 milligrams would be sufficient to kill a horse.   Best used in homeopathic dilution.


3    
ACORUS CALAMUS
 
“Sweet Flag”  “Cinnamon Sedge”
 
Family:  Araceae
 
Active Constituents:  B-asarone, acorin (bitter principle), sesquiterpenes, mucilage, and saponins.
 
 
Habitat:  Found in wet soil such as ditches, marshes, lakes and rivers.
 
Origin:  Found in India, Russia, Europe, parts of Asia and Northern United States.
 
Parts Used:  Rhizomes
 
 
Uses:   Used in all nervous complaints, vertigoes, headaches and hypochondriacal affections.  Recommended in dysentery and chronic catarrhs.  This herb is an agreeable stomachic when taken before dinner and the root can be candied for dyspeptic patients.  It is a mild stimulant where the root is burned to clear the air in typhoid, cholera and flu cases. 
 
The scent of this herb is found in the rooms of those sick with cholera, flu, or typhoid.  Many know this herb to be sweet, as many of its common names attest.  Its sweetness can be very agreeable to those who suffer from dyspepsia if candied, and it will calm those who have trouble with their nerves.


6    
AGRIMONIA EUPATORIA
 
“Agrimony”
 
Family:    Rosaceae (Rose Family)
 
Active Constituents:    Agrimophol, Agrimonine, Agrimonolide, Vitamins C and K, Catechin Tannin, Saponins, Luteolin -7-B-glucoside, Apigenin-7-B-glucoside.
 
 
Habitat:   Fields, hedgerows, waste areas
 
Origin:   Indigenous to middle and northern Europe, temperate Asia.  It has spread into North America.
 
Parts Used:   The whole flowering plants and roots.
 
 
Uses:   Anthelmintic (used to expel tapeworms), chronic infections of the digestive organs, bowel complaints, chronic mucous, diseases, ulcerations of the mouth and throat, asthma, fevers and colds. 
Bach Flower Remedy:  Agrimony is called “the Honesty Flower”.  Dr. Bach’s description of those who need this remedy:  “Jovial, cheerful, humorous people who love peace and are distressed by argument or quarrel, to avoid which they will agree to give up much.”
 
Sometimes called “Church Steeples” or “Burr Marigold”.  In Native American Medicine, this herb was used to “expel evil depositions of the body”.  This herb was named after the great herb collector King Mithridates Eupator.


13      
ALTHAEA OFFICINALIS
 
“Marshmallow”
 
Family:    Malvaceae (Mallow family)
 
Active Constituents:    Mainly mucilage: polysaccarides (from 10% to 35%).  Includes glucuronic acid, galaturonic acid and arabinans.  Also contains flavonoids, caffeic acid, p-coumaric acid, ferulic acid, p-hydroxybenzoic acid, salicylic acid, vanillic acid, syringic acid, p-hydroxyphenylacetic acid, scopeletin and saccharose.
 
 
Habitat:   Grows in marshes, river banks and soils that are sandy and moist.  This herb grows best in salty areas by the sea.
 
Origin:   Native to Europe, currently from Norway to Spain, Western and Northern Asia, Asia Minor, Australia and Eastern North America.
 
Parts Used:   Dried root, leaves and flowers.
 
 
Uses:   Traditional uses:  Externally, as an application for dysentery, acute vaginitis and gonorrhea; as a gargle for an inflamed throat, and applied as a compress to be “comforting to painful piles” (hemorrhoids).  Internally as a demulcent and diuretic, and for inflamed and irritated mucous membranes seen in hoarseness, cough and gastrointestinal problems.
 
The roots and leaves of this plant are high in mucilage, which is responsible for their soothing effect on sore throats and minor skin irritations.


15    
ANGELICA ARCHANGELICA
 
“Garden Angelica”
 
Family:    Apiaceae (formerly Umbelliferae)
 
Active Constituents:    Volatile oils, coumarins (e.g. osthole, angelicin), plant acids, resins, starches, flavonone (archagelenone), isopsoralene angelicins, tannins
 
 
Habitat:   Grows best in moist, fertile soils and can tolerate cold.  Found in Iceland, Lapland, northern Scotland, the Alps and Pyrenees.  Cultivated in many northern European countries.
 
Origin:  Native of Syria, spread to cool European climates around the 1500s. 
 
Parts Used:  Roots, leaves, stems and seeds
 
 
Uses:   Current Naturopathic
Flatulent dyspepsia (carminative, cholagogue)
Coughs, respiratory catarrh (expectorant, antispasmodic)
Fevers, malaria (diaphoretic)
Chronic rheumatic complaints and gout
Loss of appetite
 
This plant was highly regarded as being able to protect against evil spirits and witchcraft while also curing virtually all ailments – including the plague.  It has been used as a decoration for candies and jellies, and flavouring for beverages such as Benedictine and Chartreuse.  Today, this plant is used medicinally as an expectorant and for flatulent dyspepsia.  Those using it are cautioned to stay out of the sun as it increases the skin’s sensitivity to light.


17      
ANGELICA SINENSIS
 
“Dong Quai”
 
Family:    Apiaceae (Umelliferae)
 
Active Constituents:    Furanocoumarins, volatile oils, organic acids, Vitamins A and E, polysaccharides.
 
 
Habitat:   Grows best on high ground in cool damp areas.
 
Origin:   Native to south western China.
 
Parts Used:   The Root; which has a characteristic sweet and pungent aroma and flavor; is harvested in autumn and dried before being used.
 
 
Uses:   One of the oldest and most widely used plants in Traditional Chinese Medicine.  Considered a great tonic, especially for the blood and the female organs.  Used widely in menopause and dysmenorrheal.  Also prescribed for conditions of “blood deficiency”, anemia, fatigue and amenorrhea.  One of the ingredients of the famous “Four Things Soup”, the most widely used woman’s tonic in China.
 


18   
ARMORACIA RUSTICANA;
COCHLEARIA ARMORACIA
 
 
“Horseradish”, “Mountain radish”
 
Family:    Cruciferae
 
Active Constituents:    Coumarins, phenols (caffeic acid), volatile oils, resin, peroxidase enzymes, ascorbic acid, starch, sugar.
 
 
Habitat:   Perennial that prefers warm, moist soil in a wide range of alkalinity.
 
Origin:   Native to southeastern Europe and western Asia.  Cultivated in North America.
 
Parts Used:   Root (harvested in August), leaves to a lesser extent (diuretic).
 
 
Uses:   This herb has antimicrobial properties, stimulates digestion and circulation.  It is given for lung and urinary tract infection and used in a poultice for rheumatism and bronchitis.  Often taken as a condiment and stimulates digestion by increasing gastric secretions. 
Topically used as a rubifacient for minor muscle aches.  Caution should be taken when using fresh juice since it can irritate skin and mucous membranes.
Cosmetically, the extract has been used in hair tonics to stimulate hair growth.
In Homeopathy, horseradish is used for eye and upper respiratory tract inflammation, and upper abdominal colic.
 
This plant is best known for its use as a condiment; the hot pungent flavour of the macerated root is a well-known companion for roast beef.  It has been used as one of the “bitter herbs” of the Jewish Passover tradition, and few things are better for opening up the sinuses, as anyone can attest who has eaten wasabe paste at a Japanese restaurant.  Commonly used as a poultice in folk medicine traditions for lung congestion and muscle pain.


21      
ARCTIUM LAPPA
 
“Burdock” “Gobo”
 
Family:    Asteraceae (Compositae)
 
Active Constituents:    Carbohydrates, mucilage,  polyacetylenes, amino acids, lignas, alkaloids, condensed tannins, inulin, sesquiterpene lactones, volatile oils, bitter glycosides, and phytosterols.
 
 
Habitat:   Found on roadsides, in waste places and around fields in China, Asian Russia, Europe, Britain and North America.
 
Origin:   Native to Siberia, Northern China and Europe.
 
Parts Used:   Roots and rhizome.
 
 
Uses:   Traditionally used for kidney, lung and skin problems as a diuretic, alterative, and an appetite stimulant.  In Japan, “Gobo” is used as a vegetable.  Historically was used to treat throat obstructions, boils, tumors and to relieve pain.  It is active as a free radical scavenger and possesses some anti-bacterial qualities (against gram negative bacteria).  It has also shown some action against HIV-1 virus.  Studies have supported its action against cancer acting as both a tumor inhibitor and as an antimutagenic.
In Asian Medicine, it has a long use in dispersing Wind-Heat, treating sore throats, psoriasis, chronic sores and constipation.
 
This herb can be found in a Japanese restaurant wrapped up like sushi or marinated in sweet vinegar, with an earthly flavor.  In fact, in Japan it is as common a vegetable as potato is in North America.  Its roots grow deep into the ground and its purple flowers are surrounded by burs as sticky as Velcro!  It has a long tradition of medicinal use in many cultures.


22 & 23    
ARNICA MONTANA & ARNICA CHAMISSIONIS
 
“Arnica”, “Leopard’s Bane”
 
Family:  Asteraceae
 
Active Constituents:  A. Montana:  sesquiterpene lactones, tannins, arnicin, gallic acid, gum chloride, acrid resin, inulin, silica. 
A. Chamissionis:  chamissonolides, arnifolins, acylated glycosides.
 
 
Habitat:  Thrives in moist, shady alpine meadows and mountainous regions.
 
Origin:  Native to the alpine regions of Europe, the Western US border and Western Canada.
 
Parts Used:  Flowers, roots and rhizomes
 
 
Uses:   Arnica has long been used topically in the form of ointments and compresses.  It is anti-inflammatory, a counterirritant, an analgesic and an antiseptic.  It is potentially lethal even at small doses and so it is mostly used homeopathically.
Homeopathic uses include first aid, shock, trauma, injury, concussion, hemorrhage and pain.
 
This long established medicinal plant grows abundantly in Alpine meadows.  It is used regularly by millions of people around the world for injuries of all kinds.
 
 


24      
ARTEMISIA ABROTANUM
 
“Southernwood”  “Lad’s Love”  “Maiden’s Ruin”
 
Family:    Asteraceae
 
Active Constituents:    Absinthol, bitter, tannin, alkaloid, abrotine, artemsitin, calycanthoside, adenine, adenosine, caffeic acid, choline, guanine, rutin, scopoletin, scopolin, uric acid.
 
 
Habitat:   May tolerate elevations above 10,000 feet.  Thrives in good soil and full sun.  Often occurs on disturbed sites including roadsides and open fields, dwellings and gardens.
 
Origin:   Native to Asia, and Europe; now also found in North and South America.
 
Parts Used:   Aerial parts; flowering stems.
 
 
Uses:   Southernwood has been primarily used as an emmenogogue, to remove threadworms from children and as a bitter tonic.  Compresses were often applied to frostbite and skin abrasions, and young men applied this to their face to promote hair growth!  Recent research has found that A. abrotanum has the ability to relax smooth muscles.
In Homeopathy, Abrotanum is used in marasmus, anxiety, and in rheumatic conditions with cardiac irritation.
 
This plant is an emmenogogue and an anthelmintic that has also been used as an aphrodisiac.  Its pleasant lemony scent refreshes rooms and also repels insects.
 


30
ARTEMISIA VULGARIS
 
“Mugwort”
 
Family:  Asteraceae (Compositae)
 
Active Constituents:  Volatile oils, inulin, sesquiterpene lactone, flavonoids, coumarin derivatives, triterpenes, vitamins, tannins, acrid resin.
 
 
Habitat:  Found in temperate regions of the northern hemisphere.  It flourishes in open areas and along roads.
 
Origin:  Europe, now naturalized in much of North America.
 
Parts Used:  Leaves and root
 
 
Uses:    Historically used by Romans to prevent aching feet. 
In Traditional Chinese Medicine Mugwort is used in moxibustion.  It warms the lung, liver, spleen and kidney meridians.  Also used to restore and stimulate the uterus and to expel parasites. 
In Ayurvedic Medicine, it is used as an atnthelmintic, antiseptic and an expectorant. 
In Homeopathy, the remedy mugwort is used for epileptic conditions, profuse sweat having a fetid/cadaverous/garlic odour and profuse menstruation.
 
The leaves of this plant are extraordinarily bitter.  When dried they are the principal ingredient of moxa, the “burning-stick” used for moxibustion in Traditional Chinese Medicine.   It also has uses as an emmenagogue, anthelminthic and as an antimicrobial agent.  It has been proven to lower the incidence of breached birth presentations.
 
 


31      
ARUM TRIPHYLLUM
 
“Jack-in-the-Pulpit”
 
Family:    Araceae
 
Active Constituents:    Acrid principle, starch, gum, albumen, saccharine matter, calcium & potassium salts, & extractive.  When the acrid property is driven off by heat the root yields a pure, delicate, emylaceous matter which is very nutritive.  Calcium oxalate gives the corm its acridity.
 
 
Habitat:   Damp localities
 
Origin:   North & South America
 
Parts Used:   Dried root or cormus
 
 
Uses:   Flatulence, croup, whooping cough, stomatitis, asthma.  Chronic laryngitis with sudden hoarseness & aphonia.   Ulceration of larynx & pharynx, aggravated red sore throat.  Bronchitis, pains in chest, colic, low stage of typhus, affections connected with a cachectic state.  Prostration of low fevers with wild delirium, useful in cerebro-spinal fever & scarlatina when delirium is present.  When the tongue is swollen, red & painful & the buccal membranes inflamed.  Externally:  scrofulous tumors, tinea capitis & other cutaneous diseases.
 
The root of this plant has been used for many different periods and cultures in medicine.  In Folkloric and Eclectic traditions it was indicated for a sore throat, laryngitis, inflammation and infections of the respiratory tract much like is today.  The Native Americans, similarly, used it for a hoarse voice, sore throat, respiratory conditions and skin infections.


37   
ASTRAGALUS MEMBERANACEUS
 
“Huang Qi” “Milk-Vetch” “Yellow-Vetch”
 
Family:    Leguminosae (or Fabaceae)
 
Active Constituents:    Triterpene glycosides, saponins, tragacanth, sterols, fatty acids, isoflavonoid compounds, amino acids, polysaccharides
 
 
Habitat:   It is grown from seed in spring or autumn and thrives in sandy, well-dried soil, with plenty of sun.  The root of the 4-7year old plant are harvested in autumn.
 
Origin:   Astragalus is native to Mongolia and northern and eastern China.  It is also grown in Japan, Korea, Iran and Iraq
 
Parts Used:  The primary medicinal parts of the herb are the roots
 
 
Uses:   In Modern Phytopharmacy, studies of astragalus have confirmed its immune-enhancing effects.  It has been shown to increase white blood cell count in immuno-suppressed patients, and cancer patients receiving chemotherapy.
In Traditional Chinese Medicine Huang Qi is a considered warming tonic, used to increase stamina, endurance, and resistance to disease.  Often prescribed in conditions of physical weakness and poor immunity. 
 
This is one of the most popular tonic herbs in China.  For over 2,000 years it has been a mainstay of Fu-Zheng therapy (the use of herbs to strengthen immunity).  It is believed to strengthen the host’s vital energy or “qi”.  Its antiviral and immune modulating effects make it a popular remedy in the treatment of respiratory infections and immune depression.


39    
ATROPA BELLADONNA
 
“Belladonna” “Deadly Nightshade”
“Dwale” “Death’s Herb”
 
Family:  Solanaceae
 
Active Constituents:  Atropine, hyoscyamine; scopolamine and other anti-cholinergic alkaloids, as well as starches, gums and lignins.
 
 
Habitat:  A weed plant that does well in many settings
 
Origin:  Native to Europe
 
Parts Used:  All parts are active and poisonous.
 
 
Uses:   Belladonna-derived atropine has a long history of use as a mydriatic (dilator of the pupil); other important medical uses have included smooth muscle relaxant, anti-spasmodic, heat stimulant and anti-Parkinson’s drug.
In Homeopathy, Belladonna is of paramount importance in the treatment of acute febrile illnesses, infections, congestive headaches and migraines.  Characteristic symptoms include: hallucinations or vivid dreams during a fever, throbbing, pounding or pulsating sensations, dilated or glassy pupils, heat and redness in affected parts.
 
“Beautiful Lady” is one of my names.  I have been used for centuries to widen the pupils.  All my parts are poisonous; so I am best employed in homeopathic potency – where I am a top remedy of migraine, strep throat and high fevers in children.


46      
BERBERIS AQUIFOLIUM
 
“Oregon Grape” “Mahonia”
“Mountain Grape”
 
Family:    Berberidaceae, (Barberry Family)
 
Active Constituents:    Isoquinoline Alkaloids:  Berbamine, Berberine.
 
 
Habitat:   Located in the Rocky Mountain Range in the United States and Canada.
 
Origin:   Indigenous to the Pacific United States and Canada
 
Parts Used:   Rhizome and roots, flowers and berries, dried branch and twig bark, root bark.
 
Uses:   Used internally for scaly skin, psoriasis, eczema, bronchitis, gastritis, cholecystits, and digestive problems.  Ease the pain of arthritis and rheumatism, throat, urinary tract, gastrointestinal tract, lung, yeast infection, and diarrhea.  Stimulates the body’s immune system.   
In Homeopathy, for dry skin rashes (e.g., for psoriasis between the acute phases) and for liver and gallbladder conditions; remedy for skin, chronic catarrhal affections, secondary syphilis.         
 
Many Native American tribes made a decoction of parts of this plant to stimulate the appetite and treat cough, kidney disorders, ulcers, and liver ailments.  They regarded it as a tonic for overall weaknesses.  Most important, it contains a high concentration of Berberine.  The rootwood of this plant gets its bright yellow colour from the berberine.


77    
CICHORIUM INTUBUS
 
“Chicory”
 
Family:  Asteraceae, (Compositae)
 
Active Constituents:  Fructans (mulin, up to 58% in the root), sesquiterpene lactones, coumarins, taraxesterol and sugars.  The roasted roots have also been found to contain acetophenone and beta-carboline alkaloids.
 
Habitat:  Native to Europe and western Asia.  It was introduced to North America and Northern Europe where it can now be found growing uncultivated.
 
Origin:  Native to central, eastern and southern Europe, Asia Minor, North Africa and Ethiopia.
 
Parts Used:  The root is most commonly used, but depending on tradition, any part of the whole plant may be utilized.
 
Uses:   The most common use of chicory is as a food.  It is available as a spice or the leaves may be used in salads.  The roots may be boiled or dried and used as a coffee substitute. 
Medicinally, chicory is considered a tonic, diuretic, laxative, and hepatic.  It is recognized in the German Commission E Monographs as a treatment for loss of appetite and dyspepsia only, but has a rich history of use in many other medical traditions. 
As a Bach Flower Remedy, chicory is indicated for possessiveness, self-love, self-pity, and feelings of being unappreciated.
 
This plant is native to Europe and Southwest Asia, but can now be found throughout North America.  Depending on the medical tradition in question, the whole plant may be used, but it is the root that contains inulin.  In eclectic, Native American, Traditional Chinese, and Ayurvedic medicines, it was most often used in conditions of the liver, and sometimes to purify the spleen and increase appetite.  Galen once referred to it as “the livers best friend”.


79    
CIMICIFUGA RACEMOSA
 
“Black Cohosh” “Bugbane” “Snakeroot”
 
Family:  Ranunculaceae
 
Active Constituents:  Triterpene glycosides (saponins) – actein, cimicifugoside.   Isoflavones – formononectin.  Acids – caffeic, isoferulic, salicylic, acetic, butyric, palmitic
 
Habitat:  Dense woods
 
Origin:  Native to eastern North America and can be found from Maine to Ontario and Wisconsin to Georgia.
 
Parts Used:  Rhizome and roots
 
Uses:   In Modern Phytopharmacy, extracts of Cimicifuga are widely sold in preparations such as Remifemin R alleviate common symptoms of menopause – hot flashes, anxiety and depression.  Also prescribed for premenstrual symptoms and menstrual pain. 
In Native American Medicine,  snakeroot was widely used for menstrual irregularities and to aid childbirth.
In Midwifery, Black Cohosh is used to prepare the uterus and cervix for labour; both as a botanical and in homeopathic potencies.
In Homeopathy, Cimicifuga (also known as Actaea racemosa) is a well proven remedy, considered by Constantine Hering to be a polychrest.  Some of its best know symptoms: gloomy, nervous feeling (“like a dark cloud”), fear of going crazy, painful stiffness of neck with spasm (“as if everything catches in the neck”), and loquacity with frequent changing of subject (similar to Lachesis).
 
The Latin name of this plant derives from “cimex” (bug) and “fuga” (to repel), referring to its popular use as an insect repellent.  Native Americans called this herb Snakeroot.  It was historically used for any pain with a rheumatic characteristic but is now predominantly known for its use for menstrual disorders and menopause.  There are more than 2 million people currently using extracts of this plant worldwide, making it one of our most important indigenous North American plants.


102    
DATURA STRAMONIUM
 
“Stramonium” “Jimson Weed” “Thorn Apple”
 
Family:    Solanaceae
 
Active Constituents:    The principle constituents of Datura Stramonium are the alkaoloids: hyoscyamine, hyoscine (scopolamine), and atropine.  Other constituents include flavonoids, withanolides, coumarins, and tannins.
 
 
Habitat:   Found in the Americas, Europe, Asia and North Africa, this weed prefers nitrogen-rich soils, thriving in barnyards, abandoned fields, and along roadside and forest edges.
 
Origin:   While its native country is unknown, it is postulated that Datura Stramonium originated in central Asia.
 
Parts Used:   While almost every part of this plant seems to possess medicinal properties, the leaf and seeds are preferred.
 
 
Uses:   In the Native American tradition, Datura is an important ceremonial and shamanic plant, a powerful hallucinogen, greatly stimulating to the visual imagination. 
Most commonly used in Homeopathy, Stramonium is a major remedy, frequently indicated in behaviour disorders, anxiety states, sleep disturbance and hyperactivity syndromes.  Very commonly prescribed for nightmares and night terrors, and other fear states with greatly heightened imagination; a sensation as if about to be violently attacked.


105     
DIOSCOREA VILLOSA
 
“Wild Yam” “Colic Root”
 
Family:    Dioscoreaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Steroidal saponins, isoquinuclidine alkaloids, phytosterols, tannins and resin.
 
 
Habitat:   A herbaceous twining perennial which grows in tropical, subtropical and temperate regions.
 
Origin:   Indigenous to Canada and Southern United States.
 
Parts Used:   Root, Rhizome
 
 
Uses:   The genera Dioscorea are very important in Western medicine since most steroid hormones used in modern medicine including birth control pills were originally synthesized from yam derived components. 
In Chinese Medicine, it is known as Shan Yao, and functions to circulate the Qi, relax the nerves, calm the liver and gall bladder, relieve pain and irritability, dries mucous and damp, arrests discharge, relieves nausea, and prevents miscarriage. 
In Homeopathy, Dioscorea is an important remedy for colicky cramping pains, which are worse from bending forward, and better from straightening up or stretching backwards.
 
I am a graceful plant with a wild side.  I grow in North, America, but also live in Mexico and tropical regions.  My diosgenin is used to manufacture progesterone and other steroid drugs.  I relieve your gas, colic and rheumatic pain.  I walk with my back extended and arms stretched over my head.  Ladies use with caution, too much of me and you might look like a man!


108 - 110     
ECHINACEA
 
3 Varieties 
1) Echinacea Purpurea:  “Purple Cone Flower”
2) Echinacea Angustifolia:  “Narrow-Leaved Purple Cone Flower”
3) Echinacea Pallida:  “Pale Purple Cone Flower”
 
Family:    Asteraceae (Compositae)
 
Active Constituents:     Alkylamides including echinacein, alkaloids, polyacetylenes, fatty acids, flavonoids, phenolic compounds, polysaccharides and carbohydrates.
 
 
Habitat:   Originally a prairie wild flower, now also a common garden ornamental.
 
Origin:   Native to the prairies of North America, from Texas to Saskatchewan.
 
Parts Used:   All parts are used medicinally.
 
 
Uses:   In Modern Phytopharmacy, Echinacea is primarily used as an immuno-stimulant to ward off colds, flus, and sore throats.  It has been shown to increase macrophage activity and interferon production.  It is also being investigated for its possible anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer activity. 
In Native American Medicine Echinacea has long been a standard remedy of the Plains Indians, probably used for more healing purposes than any other plant.  Not only for colds and flus, but snake and spider bites, burns, tumors and wounds.
 
The tongue-tingling extract of this plant is used by millions to boost the immune system and fight off colds and flus. Today it is one of the top selling herbal preparations world-wide.


117    
EQUISETUM ARVENS
 
“Bottlebrush” “Horsetail” “Shavegrass”
 
Family:    Equisetaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Silicic acid and silicates, flavonoids, phenolic acids, alkaloids, phytosterols, polyenic and rare dicarboxylic acids.
 
 
Habitat:   Found in temperate zones of Asia and North America and Europe.  Thrives in wet, shallow banks, roadsides, often grows in sand and gravel.
 
Origin:   Uncertain
 
Parts Used:   Aerial parts.
 
 
Uses:   Traditionally used as a diuretic, a hemostatic, in treatment of TB and conditions of the urinary system, such as stones and infections.  Used to heal fractured bones, wounds, ulcers, adenomas, cysts and tumors, and to strengthen connective and epithelial tissue. 
In Native American Medicine it is used externally for rashes, mouth sores and teething gums, and internally for urinary aid, irregular menstruation, edema, gonorrhea and to expel afterbirth. 
In Traditional Chinese Medicine, it is generally used to fight infection, decrease inflammation and clear damp heat.
 
This silica-rich plant is a prehistoric relic that is a close relative to trees that grew 270 million years ago in the Carboniferous period.  Its genus name is derived from the Latin words equus meaning horse and seta meaning bristle.
 


130    
FOENICULUM VULGARE
 
“Fennel”
 
Family:    Apiaceae  (Umbelliferae)
 
Active Constituents:    Bitters, fixed oil, flavanoids, organic acids, stillbene trimers, plant sterols, beta carotene, Vitamin C, iron, magnesium
 
 
Habitat:   Indigenous to the Mediterranean, and spread to England, Germany, South Tyrol, Argentina, India, China, Egypt, Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania.
 
Origin:   The two species vulgare and dulce derived from the cultivated subspecies capillaceum HOLMBOE.
 
Parts Used:   Seeds and Fennel oil extracted from the fruit.  Traditionally, the roots were used, but were found to contain fewer medicinally active constituents.
 
Uses:   Fennel is a carminative and aids digestion.  It is used for peptic discomforts such as flatulent colic, feeling of fullness, and to increase appetite.  In higher concentrations, Fennel has an antispasmodic effect.  Fennel has been used traditionally for hiccups and shortness of breath, to decrease nausea and wheezing, in syrup for chronic cough and as a gargle for mouth and throat inflammation.  Fennel is an estrogenic agent and is used to promote breast milk secretion, regulate menstruation, facilitate birth, alleviate the symptoms of male climacteric and increase libido. 
 
Early English colonists introduced this plant to North America, where village apothecaries widely prescribed it as a digestive aid, and as a lactation and menstruation promoter. Latin Americans still boil the seeds in milk, which is then ingested by nursing mothers to increase lactation.  Jamaicans use it to treat respiratory problems.  In Africa it is used for diarrhea and digestive upsets.


  131    
FORSYTHIA SUSPENSA
 
“Forsythia” “Chinese forsythia”  “Weeping forsythia”
 
Family:    Oleaceae
 
Active Constituents:    The major active components include:  forsythol, saponins, phillyrin, glycosides, oleanolic acid, abscisin, hydrocarbons, aldehyde ketone, and alcohol ester ether. 
 
 
Habitat:   Grows in barren bush or fringe of woods.  A common ornamental garden plant with bright yellow foliage in April and May.
 
Origin:   Shaxi, Shaanxi, and Henan provinces in China and Japan, spread to Europe and North America as ornamentals.
 
Parts Used:   Fruit is collected in autumn when ripe (golden tan in colour with thick shells).
 
 
Uses:   Combine with goldenseal in decoction for boils and abscesses. 
In Traditional Chinese Medicine, Forsythia is traditionally prescribed to boost the immune response in common acute illnesses.  Recently forsythia has been shown to have a wide spectrum of antibacterial activity against Shigella, Staphylococcus, Salmonella and other bacteria.
 
This herb was first documented in Shen Nong’s Herbal Classic, the earliest extant monograph on material medica in China, which appeared in about the Qin-Han Dynasties in 100BC.  Traditionally, it has been used to treat carbuncles, cold, fevers and flu’s.  It has a beneficial effect on the lung, heart, and gall bladder meridians.
 
 

133      
GALIUM APARINE
 
“Cleavers”
 
Family:    Rubiaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Iridoid monoterpenes:  including asperuloside (a mild laxative), Polyphenolic acids, Anthraquinones, Benzyl isoquinoline alkaloids:  including protopine, Beta-carboline alkaloids:  harmine, Quinazoline alkaloids:  1-hydroxydesoxypeganin, 8-hydroxy-2, 3-dehydroxydesoxypeganin, Tannins, Flavonoids
 
Habitat:   It is said to be a “hedgerow” weed, also growing in fields and in waste places.  Gathered in the pre-flowering stage in late spring.
 
Origin:   Common in Europe, in Asia from Siberia to the Himalayas, and in North and South America.
 
Parts Used:   Aerial parts – the fresh flowering herb.  Also the fresh juice, which is reported to have anti-tumor activity.
 
Uses:   Nutritive, seborrhea, eczema and psoriasis, swollen lymph gland, a general detoxification agent in serious illnesses like cancer.  Kidney stone, lithuresis, calculosis, bladder catarrh and ischuria also benefit from its actions.  Internally and externally it is used for ulcers, festering glands and lumps in the breast.  Anti-inflammatory effects are observed, and are due to the action of asperuloside.  It cleanses and stimulates the immune system, it decreases symptoms of tonsillitis, and it reduces cancerous growths, especially those associated with lymphatic cancers.  Rhinitis, chronic sinusitis and otitis media also benefit from Cleavers.
 
Historically the juice of the fresh herb was used for scurvy, and was also described as a folk cancer remedy.  It is also beneficial for cosmetic uses such as to better the complexion, as a shampoo and as a deodorant.  It has also been applied to the face to reduce freckles and sunburn.  According to herbalist Nicholas Culpeper (1653), the juice of the herb and the seed together in wine aids one bitten by snakes – it is said to “…preserve the heart from the venom…”


135    
GAULTHERIA PROCUMBENS
 
“Wintergreen”
 
Family:    Ericaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Chlorophyll, gum, tannic acid. The freshly harvested plant contains gaultherin, which converts to methyl salicylate when dried.
 
 
Habitat:   Found in woodland moss beneath conifers since it prefers acidic soil, and in hilly or mountainous regions which are well drained.
 
Origin:   Native to North America and China
 
Parts Used:   Leaves
 
 
Uses:   Primarily used as a remedy for rheumatism, it is also an anodyne, stimulant, astringent, and is used in cases of chronic mucous discharge.  The oil of wintergreen is also effective in relieving toothache.
In Homeopathy, used mainly for rheumatism.
 
This herb is used as a trail-side snack and breath-freshener by hikers.  It produces white bell-shaped flowers in midsummer which turn to red berries by autumn.  A popular ingredient of candies and chewing gums.


141    
GINKGO BILOBA
 
“Ginkgo” “Maidenhair Tree” “Yinxing”
 
Family:  Ginkgoaceae
 
Active Constituents:  Flavonoids (ginkgoflavone glycosides, ginkgo heterosides), terpenes (ginkgolides, bilobalides), organic acids
 
 
Habitat:  Cultivated worldwide, with large plantations in China, France and South Carolina.  Has a widely variable growing range, in part due to its high resistance to disease, insects and pollution.  Often seen growing in highly polluted areas.  
 
Origin:  Native to China and possibly Japan.  Considered the world’s oldest tree species, with evidence of its existence 300 million years ago.
 
Parts Used:  Mainly the leaf extract.  Seed or kernel also used in traditional Chinese medicine.
 
 
Uses:   In Modern Phytopharmacy, Ginkgo is well established in the treatment of cerebrovascular insufficiency and impaired mental function, Alzheimer’s disease, memory impairment, Raynaud’s syndrome, tinnitus, vertigo, peripheral arterial insufficiency and intermittent claudication. 
In Traditional Chinese Medicine, uses include, cough, dyspnea, enuresis and leucorrhea (due to the toxicity of the seed/kernel, its use is limited).
 
The tree is native to China and has been used in traditional Chinese medicine since around 2800 BC.  The medicinal extract of this tree’s leaves increases circulation and improve oxygen metabolism especially in the brain and extremities.  It is currently the best-selling herbal preparation in Europe.


148    
HAMAMELIS VIRGINIANA
 
“Witch Hazel”
 
Family:    Hamamelidaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Tannins, catechins, oligomeric procyanidins, flavonoids (quercetin and kaempferol).
 
 
Habitat:   Hamamelis virginiana prefers moist, light soil in damp partly shaded woods.  The plant is usually a part of woodland undergrowth as a shrub or small tree, which can grow to a maximum height of 15 feet.
 
Origin:   H. virginiana is indigenous to eastern North America and southern Canada.
 
Parts Used:   The bark, fresh and dried leaves, the fresh bark of the roots and branches, and the dried bark of the trunk and branches.
 
 
Uses:   The Pilgrims, who first documented the Native Americans use of witch hazel, noted their use of the plant in a tonic to relieve muscle aches and smoke burned eyes.  Leaf and bark poultices were also used by the Native Americans on tumors and painful inflammation.  In particular, the Cherokee used the highly astringent fresh leaves in teas for colds, fevers, periodic pain, sore throat, tuberculosis, and to wash sores and wounds.  It is now most commonly used for hemorrhoids (externally), inflammation of the mouth and pharynx (leaf only), venous conditions and wounds and burns. 
In Homeopathy Hamamelis is indicated for venous congestion, varicosities, slow haemorrhages, and haemorrhoids.
 
This shrub is renowned for its astringent, anti-inflammatory and hemostatic activity because of its high tannin concentration.  For hundreds of years the leaves and bark were used for their healing properties.  Still on sale today in every drug store, used primarily on skin inflammations, and shaving cuts, dermatitis and sunburn, and perhaps most commonly, to relieve haemorrhoid symptoms.
 


151      
HELIANTHUS TUBEROSUS
 
“Sunflower Artichoke”  “Jerusalem Artichoke”
 
Family:    Asteraceae/Compositae
 
Active Constituents:    Laevulin gum, sugar, albuminoids, protein, vitamin A & C, minerals and mucilage.
 
 
Habitat:   Grows in shady or open ground, which is unsuitable for other vegetables.  The largest tubers are produced from light, rich soil.
 
Origin:   Native to the North American plains.  Indigenous to the lake regions of Canada, west Saskatchewan, and south Georgia and Arkansas.  Cultivated by North American Indians as food before the settlement of the Europeans.
 
Parts Used:   Tuber, flowers, leaves, stalk, whole plant.
 
 
Uses:   It is used in Native Medicine as a food and the roots were boiled and used as an aphrodisiac and semen promoter or as a coffee substitute.
In Traditional Chinese Medicine, this plant is a sweet herb, which nourishes and warms the body.  Indications include any degenerative disease, weakened yin and to support nutrition of the body.  It produces a beneficial effect on hormones, nerves and muscles and is associated with the digestive organs, the pancreas and the muscles. 
Studies indicate that inulin may be used as a sugar substitute for diabetics.  Currently, rheumatism is the main indication.
 
My flowers are eaten fresh to relieve complaints of rheumatic joint pain.  My leaves and stalk are made into an infusion for the treatment of rheumatism and arthritic pain. 


155      
HIEROCHLOE ODORATA
 
“Sweetgrass”
 
Family:    Poaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Coumarins
 
 
Habitat:   Wet meadows, low prairies, edges of sloughs & marshes, bogs, shaded streambanks, lakeshores, and cool mountain canyons.  Usually among other grasses or shrubs; seldom in pure stands.  Can withstand some soil disturbance.
 
Origin:   A circumboreal plant common above 40 degrees in Asia, Europe, & North America.
 
Parts Used:   Leaves
 
 
Uses:   Used by Native Indians for coughs & sore throat, but best known for its use in flavoring candy, tobacco, soft drinks & perfume. 
Used by North American Tribes in basket making, and is braided, dried & burned as vanilla scented incense in prayer, smudging or purifying ceremonies.  Dried foliage is fragrant due to its coumarin content.  It has also been used to stop vaginal bleeding and expel afterbirth.  Also known as “Zebrovka” which means “the place where Bison graze”.  It is now threatened as a wild plant because of over-collection.
 


156    
HUMULUS LUPULUS
 
“Hops”
 
Family:  Cannabaceae (Hemp family)
 
Active Constituents:  Resinous bitter principles, volatile oil, flavonoids, tannins
 
 
Habitat:  Extensivley cultivated in temperate zones worldwide.  Grows wild in waste places.
 
Origin:  Native to Europe, now naturalized in much of central to eastern USA
 
Parts Used:  Strobile (female flowers)
 
 
Uses:   Hops contains many sedative and pain relieving compounds.  Used for tenseness, restlessness and difficulty falling asleep.  Major use in the production of beer.  Externally, a pillow stuffed with hops was used to promote sleep and relieve headaches. 
In Traditional Chinese Medicine,  it removes heat, promotes diuresis, used for dysuria, cystitis, tuberculosis, inflammation and infection of the skin. 
Ayurvedic use includes restlessness associated with nervous tension, headache and indigestion. 
In Homeopathy, it is a good remedy in unstrung conditions of the nervous system and with nausea, dizziness & headache following a night’s debauch.
 
This climbing perennial is widely used as a sedative for restlessness and insomnia.  Its bitter principle and spasmolytic action account for its application as an appetite stimulator and digestive aid.  Perhaps its most well known use is in the production of beer, making it perhaps the most widely used and popular herb in this garden.
 


158    
HYDRASTIS CANADENSIS L.
 
“Goldenseal”
 
Family:    Ranunculaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Alkaloids, lipids, resin, starch, sugar and small amounts of volatile oil.
 
 
Habitat:   Found in rich, moist woodland soils, strewn with leaf mould.   Goldenseal prefers riverbanks and hilly locations.  It is a particularly hardy plant and is under the constant threat of extinction due to destruction of the natural habitat and over collection.
 
Origin:   Native to central and eastern United States and southern Ontario.
 
Parts Used:   Rhizome and root.
 
 
Uses:   Used as an anti-microbial and immune stimulant, Hydrastis appears in many preparations designed to boost the immune response against colds, flus, sore throats, etc.  Also used as a bitter, cholagogue, astringent, laxative, emmenagogue, alterative, anti-catarrhal, expectorant, pectoral and vulnerary. 
Current uses include catarrhal states of the mucous membrane (without inflammation), relaxed tissues with profuse secretions of yellow/green muco-pus, mouth and throat ulcerations, and atonic gastric irritability. 
In Homeopathy, Goldenseal is used as an anti-neoplastic remedy, and an important sinusitis remedy, with characteristic yellow mucus.
 
This native American plant is described as “king of tonics to the mucous membranes”.  Because of its bright yellow color it was often used as a dye source. 


165      
INULA HELENIUM
 
“Elecampane”
 
Family:   Asteraceae/Compositae
 
Active Constituents:   Sesquiterpene lactones, carbohydrate-inulin, triterpenes, sterols, volatile oils, mucilage, and resins.
 
 
Habitat:   It is found in moist, sandy, and mountainous areas.  Found along roadsides, hedgerows, and riverbanks.
 
Origin:   Europe and Northern Asia, now naturalized over much of eastern North America.
 
Parts Used:   Root and rhizome.
 
 
Uses:   Elecampane is indicated for cough, wheezing, shortness of breath (asthma), whooping cough in children, bronchitis, emphysema, tuberculosis, as a digestive tonic and for expelling worms in children. 
In Homeopathy, elecampane is used as a mucous membrane medicine.  As well, bronchial symptoms, sub-sternal pain and diabetes.
In Traditional Chinese Medicine, it is used for asthmatic bronchitis with excessive phlegm and in related cases of shortness of breath.
 
This plant has a history of its root and rhizome being used to treat respiratory ailments.  Also, while being used extensively in Native American tradition for the treatment of tuberculosis and having recent studies show that it is an effective anti-microbial against, Mycobacterium tuberculosis.


 
 
168      
JUNIPERUS COMMUNIS
 
“Juniper” “Genievre”
 
Family:    Cupressaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Volatile oils, tannins,
flavonids, sugars, vitamin C, junionone, resin, diterpene acids, and glucuronic.
 
 
Habitat:   Found in Europe, Northern Africa,
Northern Asia, North Asia and North America.
 
Origin:   North & Central Europe
 
Parts Used:   Berry cones
 
 
Uses:   Juniper  berries are one of the world’s most widely used herbal diuretics, used for urinary infections and conditions of the genitourinary tract and musculoskeletal system, for digestive upset, and dyspeptic complaints.  Can be used to labour to encourage uterine contractions.  Juniperus is also used externally for rheumatism and neuralgic pain.  
In Folk Medicine, the oil extracted from the berries has been used for typhoid, cholera, dysentery and tapeworms.  The characteristic, pungent taste of gin is derived from Juniper berries.
 
When my berries turn blue, you’ll know I am ripe, found all around the world, I am quite the diverse type.  Don’t take me if you’re pregnant or if your kidneys bother you, I might abort your baby and make your kidneys feel worse too!  From digestion to bladder problems, taken external or within, you might know how I taste from gin!
 


175    
LEDUM PALLUSTRE
(or LEDUM GROENLANDICUM)
 
“Labrador Tea” “Marsh Tea” “Wild Rosemary”
 
Family:  Ericacea (Heath family)
 
Active Constituents:  Arbutin; responsible for much of the antiseptic and bacterial properties; tannins; citric acid; hyperocide; ledol, malic acid, myrcence, oxalic acid, quercitin and tartaric acid.
 
 
Habitat:  Bogs and peaty soils
 
Origin:  Widespread among northern regions of Europe and North America
 
Parts Used:  Leaves
 
 
Uses:    American Indians used the leaf tea for asthma, colds, kidney ailments and rheumatism. 
In Folk Medicine, used for coughs, dysentry and indigestion; externally for leprosy, itching and lice. 
In Homeopathy, Ledum is a top remedy for wounds and injuries, especially black eyes, puncture wounds, and parts which remain bruised and swollen long after the injury.  Also a top remedy for arthritis, gout and insect bites.
 
 
In Sweden, Ledum is used to keep lice off oxen and pigs.  The leaves are picked and steeped to make a hot drink that substitutes for tea.  Early explorers in the wilds of Canada learned from the native Indians, that Ledum could be used to ward off scurvy.
 
 

186      
LINUM USITATISSIMUM
 
“Flaxseed”  “Flax”
 
Family:    Linaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Fixed oils, mucilage, lignans, cyanogenic glycosides, phenylpropane derivatives, prussic acid and protein.
 
 
Habitat:   Resident to the temperate zones of Europe and Asia, it is also cultivated in tropical regions all over the world.  The proper time to harvest Linum seeds is in the summer or early autumn.
 
Origin:   Middle East
 
Parts Used:   Seeds, seed oil, whole plant.
 
 
Uses:   Chronic diseases, cardiovascular diseases, hormone modulated cancers such as breast and colon cancer, hypertension, skin conditions such as eczema  and psoriasis, topically as a poultice for inflammation, gastrointestinal problems such as constipation, IBS, diverticular diseases, gastritis and enteritis and also increases renal function. 
As a Homeopathic,  Linum is prescribed for conditions that produce effects that are “violent” in nature marked with “intense irritation” in cases of extreme inflammation such as urinary, cystitis, strangury, etc.
 
This herb has its origins in the Middle East and is named after the seed it bears.  The seed and seed oil are of major medicinal value and the lignans contained in the seeds exhibit phytoestrogenic like actions.  This herb has a long list of uses ranging from cardiovascular disease to cancer but is known for its stool bulking abilities and gastrointestinal uses.  This herb is rich in mucilage and can soothe and protect any irritated or inflamed mucous membrane.  It can be applied topically or taken orally. 


193      
LONICERA JAPONICA
 
“Japanese Honeysuckle” 
“Gold Silver Flower”
 
Family:    Caprifoliaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Luteolin, glycosides, inositol, flavonoids, tannins, mucilages, sugars, essential oils
 
 
Habitat:   Grows best in full sunlight.  Often found in areas of human disturbance and destruction (e.g. road sides, trails, abandoned fields, logging areas and pest/disease outbreak areas).
 
Origin:   Native to Eastern Asia.  Cultivated on Long Island in the 1800s and now widely naturalized in the eastern and central United States and Canada.  Considered a noxious weed in parts of southern USA.
 
Parts Used:   Flower
 
 
Uses:   In current Naturopathic practice it is used for infectious diseases and sores/abscesses (antiviral, antifungal, antibacterial, antiseptic); hot, swollen, painful joints (anti-inflammatory). 
In Traditional Chinese Medicine, it clears wind, dampness and heat from large intestine, lung and stomach channels.  Common ingredient in Chinese patent medicines for bronchitis, coughs, colds and flu; such as Yin Qiao. 
Bach Flower Remedy:  (Lonicera caprifolium- a closely related honeysuckle) is indicated for dwelling in the past, regret, nostalgia, homesickness.  Dr. Bach wrote:  “this is the remedy to remove from the mind the regrets and sorrows of the past and bring us back to the present”.
 
Concentrates of the “Gold and Silver” flower of this hardy vine are widely used in Chinese patent medicines for colds and flu.  The flowers contain at least a dozen anti-viral compounds.


197      
LYCOPUS VIRGINICUS
 
“Bugleweed”
 
Family:    Laminaceae (Mint family)
 
Active Constituents:    Phenolic acid derivatives, lithospermic acid and tannins.
 
 
Habitat:   Eastern U.S.A., preferring moist, shady places showing particular fondness for wet, boggy soils. 
 
Origin:   North America
 
Parts Used:   Fresh aerial parts.
 
 
Uses:   Traditional uses include alcoholics with gastrointestinal problems, diarrhea, pulmonary diseases and debilitating cough with purulent mucous discharge.  It was also externally applied to ulcerations or burns. 
Current uses mainly involve the heart and circulatory system but also includes hemorrhage of gastrointestinal tract, lungs or kidneys and hyperthyroidism. 
In Homeopathy, it is indicated in hemoptysis due to heart disease, heart palpitations, a sense of oppression in the heart or a tumultuous heart, precordial pain or cyanosis, bulging eyes, testicular pain in males and insomnia. 
 
This North-American native plant grows in wet, boggy places and displays purplish flowers.  It is known for its anti-thyrotropic and anti-gonadotropic activities, but has been used by the eclectics for situations of hemorrhage as well.


201      
MARRUBIUM VULGARE
 
“Horehound”
 
Family:    Laminaceae or Labiatae (Mint Family)
 
Active Constituents:    Diterpene alcohols, flavonoids, alkaloids, volatile oils, tannins, phytosterols.
 
 
Habitat:   Grows on dry, sandy fields, waste grounds, roadsides and in cultivation.
 
Origin:   Native to the Middle East and in the region between the region between the Mediterranean Sea to Central Asia.
 
Parts Used:   Whole plant.
 
 
Uses:   Used internally for acute and chronic bronchitis, colds, asthma, whooping cough, tuberculosis, non-productive coughs, infections, and hoarseness.  Also used for loss of appetite, dyspepsia, jaundice, debility and painful menstruation, hysteria, and mercurial ptyalism.  Externally used for ulcers and wounds and gargled for mouth and throat infections.
 
The herb has been used as an expectorant in cough remedies since ancient Egyptian times.  Used today in many cough syrups and throat lozenges, especially in Europe. Also a common ingredient is stomach bitters to improve digestion and appetite.
 
 
 


205      
MELILOTUS OFFICINALIS
 
“Sweet Clover”
 
Family:    Fabaceae (pea and legume family)
 
Active Constituents:    Free coumarin, hydroxycoumarins, flavonoids, triterpene saponins, and volatile oils.
 
 
Habitat:   This plant is found all over Europe, Australia and North America, as well as temperate regions of Asia.  This annual or biennial legume is a weedy plant that does well in rural habitats and grows between 30-250cm high.
 
Origin:   Originating in Eurasia it became naturalized once introduced to North America, where it is now distributed throughout the northern hemisphere.
 
Parts Used:   Dried roots and aerial parts.
 
 
Uses:   Traditionally Egyptians made a tea from the plant to treat intestinal worms and earaches.  Galen used a poultice for inflammations and swollen joints.  It is commonly used now for blunt injuries, hemorrhoids, and venous conditions (thrombophlebitis, postthrombotic syndromes, lymphatic congestion).  Externally it is used for contusions, sprains and superficial effusions of blood. 
In Homeopathy Melilotus is an important remedy for congestive headaches which make the patient frantic, accompanied by red, flushed face, throbbing carotids and bloodshot eyes.
 
This “weed” can be found growing abundantly all over Europe, Australia, and North America – thriving in poor conditions.  It’s antiphlogistic, antiexudative, and antiedematous actions make it an excellent remedy for venous conditions and blunt injuries (sprains and contusions).  In Homeopathy an unusual mental symptom of this remedy is heightened fear of police.
 
 


208   
MENTHA PIPERITA
 
“Peppermint”
 
Family:   Labiatae
 
Active Constituents:    Volatile oils: menthol, cineole and limonene.  Tannins, flavonoids, azulenes.
 
 
Habitat:   Europe and North America
 
Origin:   Western Europe, Egypt and Iceland
 
Parts Used:   Leaves
 
 
Uses:   Peppermint tea is enjoyed by many for its pleasant flavor and for its stomach setting properties.  It has been shown to be especially useful in Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS), nervous anxiety and insomnia.  Mentha is also used for joint and muscle pain and is a key component of many liniments and topical preparations for sore muscles. 
In Homeopathy, Mentha is used to treat bloated abdomen and infant’s colic with excess gas.  It is also used for a dry cough that is worse in the cold air.  Menthol, the major component of peppermint oil, is used in many cough candies and syrups where its cooling, volatile effect is desired.


221    
ORIGANUM VULGARE
 
“Oregano”
 
Family:    Laminaceae or Labiatae (Mint family)
 
Active Constituents:    Volatile oils, caffeic acid derivatives (rosmaric acid), bitters, tannins, resins, gum.
 
 
Habitat:   Commonly distributed throughout Asia, Europe and Northern Africa.  Perennial, woody-plant, grows up to 90cm.  Found in limestone regions, on dry banks, and in dry fields and woods, flowering from May to October.
 
Origin:  Europe
 
Parts Used:  Leaves
 
 
Uses:   Used for dyspepsia, painful menstruation, rheumatoid arthritis, scrofula, urinary tract infection, diaphoresis (promoting perspiration), asthma, toothaches, headaches, spider bites, some heart conditions, and as a nerve tonic. 
In Asian Medicine, oregano is used for conditions of lung phlegm dryness, lung phlegm damp and lung yin deficiency, by exerting a strengthening and stimulating effect, helping to liquefy and expectorate viscous phlegm in chronic conditions.
 
Originally from Europe, this is a culinary mainstay in Italian, Greek, Spanish and Mexican cuisine; the flavour complements almost all tomato dishes.


230    
PASSIFLORA INCARNATA
 
“Passion Flower” “Maypop” “Grenadille”
 
Family:    Passifloraceae
 
Active Constituents:    Flavonoids, alkaloids,
 maltol, fatty acids, sugars and gum.
 
 
Habitat:   Grows wild in sandy soils in the eastern U.S.A.  Recently a common garden and house-plant ornamental.  Also cultivated in many parts of the world for its delicious fruit.
 
Origin:   Native to Southern U.S.A.
 
Parts Used:   Whole plant has been used, but especially to leaf.
 
 
Uses:   In Modern Phytopharmacy, research shows this plant to be a mild sedative, and to slightly reduce blood pressure.  Extracts are approved in Germany for nervous tension and restlessness.  Passion flower is most commonly used in herbal teas and combinations to help people relax and sleep.  The Aztec Indians prized it as a sedative, and the poulticed root was also used for boils, cuts, and inflammation.
 
When the Spanish explorers and missionaries saw the extraordinary flower of this plant, they thought it resembled the crown of thorns given to Jesus Christ; the petals represented the 10 Apostles (not including Peter & Judas) and the main stem resembled the cross that Jesus hung on.  “Passio” means suffering and “Incarnata” means incarnate.
 
 


232
PETROSELINUM CRISPUM
 
“Parsley” 
 
Family:    Umbelliferae
 
Active Constituents:   Volatile oils, Flavonoids, Furocoumarins, Phthalides, Polyynes, Fatty oils,  Vitamins and Minerals, Nonanal & Decanal Aldyhydes, Limonene, Acetophenane, Benzotiazol
 
 
Habitat:   In nature this plant grows best in temperate regions with well-drained, neutral to alkaline soil, and with sun or partial shade.
 
Origin:   Originally found in the Mediterranean region; nowadays, cultivated in different varieties in Eurasia, North and South America, South Africa, India, Japan, and Australia.
 
Parts Used:   Roots, leaves, or whole plant.
 
 
Uses:   Widely used as a urinary tract antiseptic and diuretic for treatment of mild urinary tract infections.  Also a very important culinary herb; often recommended for juicing.  Rich in iron and chlorophyll.
 
This popular green culinary herb is commonly and traditionally used to treat menstrual problems, kidney problems, and urinary tract infections?  This herb has recently been investigated for its use in cancer prevention and blood glucose control.  In Homeopathy, this herb is known for its treatment of urinary symptoms, with a characteristic sudden urging to urinate, and intense itching deep in the urethra.

234      
PHYTOLACCA DECADRA
(AMERICANA)
 
“Pokeweed” “Poke Root” “Poke”
 
Family:    Phytolaccaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Alkaloids, Lectins, and saponins; phytolaccosides A-1, D2, O; aglycones (phytolaccagenin, jaligonic acid, hytolaccagenic acid).
 
 
Habitat:   North America (along borders of fields, road sides, etc.), North Africa, China, southern Europe, the Azores.
 
Origin:   North America
 
Parts Used:   Dried roots and berries
 
Uses:   North American Indians used berry tea for respiratory catarrh, throat infections, glandular inflammation.  Berries were poulticed for mastitis and mammary abscesses, rheumatism, skin infections, with heat and soreness.
In Homeopathy, Phytolacca is a very important sore throat remedy; typically right-sided with swollen and painful glands, and pain extending to the ears on swallowing.  Also a top remedy for mastitis and breast abscess, with pain radiating out from the nipple.
In Modern Phytopharmacy, pokeweed is being investigated for its anti-cancer and anti-HIV potential, due to the presence of an anti-viral mitogen.
 
I am native to North America.  I have a strong affinity for glandular tissue, especially the breast, tonsils, and parotids.  I am used in chronic rheumatism, abscesses and indurations.  I am considered the “vegetable Mercury” in homeopathy because my symptom picture is so similar to that of Mercury.  Old-timers in the Ozarks eat one of my berries a year to ward off rheumatism.


240      
PLANTAGO MAJOR
 
“Plantain” 
 
Family:    Plantaginaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Iridoids, aucubin; Flavonoids, apigenin; tannins; oleanolic acid; plant acids
 
 
Habitat:   Plantain grows in rich, moist places, in fields and roadsides.  It is found throughout cool temperate regions.
 
Origin:   Originating in Europe, Plantain was spread by man through the world.  It has been used in European medicine since ancient Roman and Greek times.
 
Parts Used:  Dried leaves and herb, fresh plant.  Flowers, leaves, seeds, root, whole plant, juice.  
 
 
Uses:   Used for its valuable healing properties, as a gentle expectorant, also in soothing inflamed and sore membranes.  Ideal for coughs and mild bronchitis.  Plantain relieves inflammatory infection of the skin, especially if accompanied with burning pain or itching. 
In Homeopathy, especially when the sore tooth feels elongated or too large.  Plantain is used for dental neuralgia, earaches and toothaches.
In Asian Medicine, it is used for urinary tract infections, colds, cough, and bronchitis.  The seeds of a close relative, Plantago psyllium, are widely used as a bulk laxative.
 
Often mistaken for a weed because of its widespread habitat this well-known herb is useful in relieving insect bites, healing wounds, toothaches, ear aches, soothing skin inflammation and curing the common cold.  With no known side effects or contraindications this tasty plant is very safe and convenient for everyday use.


242      
PODOPHYLLUM PELTATUM
 
“May Apple” “American Mandrake”
 
Family:    Berberidaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Lignans, favonoids, albumen, calcium oxalate, gallic acid, gum, starch, volatile and fixed oils.
 
 
Habitat:   Grows in moist soils in rich woods and pastures in Eastern North America (from Maine to Florida, west to Texas and Minnesota).
 
Origin:   Indigenous to northeastern North America.
 
Parts Used:   Rhizome
 
 
Uses:   In Folk Medicine, it was used as an emetic a vermifuge and for amenorrhea, dropsy, dysentery, dyspepsia, hepatitis, jaundice, prostatitis, rheumatism and scrofula. 
Eclectics use it as a cholagogue and for symptoms of fullness of tissues and veins. 
Native Americans used it as a vermifuge, emetic, cathartic and an eschariotic.
In Homeopathy Podophyllum is indicated in acute diarrhea, headache alternating with diarrhea, liver pains, abdominal distention, back pains, inflamed ovaries, grinding teeth at night.
An important plant in Modern Pharmacy; Podophyllum is used to treat condylomata (veneral warts) and is also active against other viruses: herpes and influenza.  Etoposide and teniposide are semi-synthetic derivatives used to treat several types of cancer.


243    
POLYGONATUM BIFLORUM
 
“Solomon’s Seal”
 
Family:  Liliaceae
 
Active Constituents:  Steroid saponins, aglycones and diosgenin.
 
 
Habitat:  Native to the woods and forested areas on high banks, hillsides, mountains and thickets, from New Brunswick to Ontario, southward to Florida and westward to Texas.  Prefers light soil and shade.
 
Origin:  Indigenous to North America
 
Parts Used:  Dried rhizome and root
 
 
Uses:   In Folk Medicine a poultice of the fresh root was used for pains from cuts, bruises, sores, ulcers and boils.  Root tea used as a remedy for haemorrhoids, arthritis, and cough.
Native American Indians use the root tea for indigestion, profuse menstruation, lung ailments, and “general debility”.  
 
A number of plant species share the common name of this plant.  This species is indigenous to North America, while others are native to Europe, China and other areas.  It is not commonly used in present day practices, but was historically used in the treatment of respiratory and lung disorders, externally for bruises, hemorrhoids, furuncles, ulcers and boils on the fingers.   African Americans of the southern states believed that this plant would bring them good luck and keep snakes away.

248     

PRUNELLA VULGARIS
 
“Self-heal” “Heal All”
 
Family:    Laminaceae  (Mint family)
 
Active Constituents:    Caffeic acid, flavonoids, pentacyclic triterpenes, prunellin, tannins, and vitamins A, B, C & K.  Contains urosolic acid which has anti-tumor activity.  Very rich in anti-oxidant compounds, including rosmarinic acid.
 
 
Habitat:   Found in temperate regions worldwide.  It grows in meadows and along roadsides and tends to thrive in sunny areas.
 
Origin:   Native to Europe and Asia
 
Parts Used:   Aerial parts and flower heads
 
 
Uses:   Used for inflammatory diseases, mouth and throat ulcers, gastroenteritis, diarrhea, hemorrhaging and gynecological disorders. 
Current uses include treatment for wounds (internal and external) and hemorrhaging, as well as for liver or gallbladder obstruction (eg. jaundice). 
In Asian Medicine, it is used specifically for the liver and gallbladder to treat excess heat conditions and for cooling liver fire.  It is also soothing for the eyes.
 
This mint family plant has a name that indicates its wide use in folk medicine as a healing agent for many conditions.  It mildly dilates blood vessels and helps to lower blood pressure.  It has a moderately strong antibiotic action against a broad range of pathogens, including Shigella and E. coli strains.  The extract of this plant has shown anti-HIV activity in cells in vitro.  Because there is insufficient reliable data on this plant, it is contraindicated in both pregnancy and lactation. 


253    
PULSATILLA VULGARIS
 
“Pulsatilla” “Pasque Flower” “Windflower”
 “Anenome Praetensis”
 
Family:    Ranunculaceae (Buttercup family)
 
Active Constituents:    Lactone (protoanemonin), glycoside (ranunculin which degrades to anemonin, anemoninc acid), essential oil, triterpenoid saponin.
 
 
Habitat:   Grows in clumps, prefers chalky soil and dry grasslands.  Recently often seen as a garden ornamental.
 
Origin:   Originally from Southwestern Europe, now extending to Central and Eastern Europe and parts of Russia.  A  closely related North American species is Pulsatilla patens, var. Nuttaliana
 
Parts Used:   Dried aerial parts
 
 
Uses:   In Homeopathy, Pulsatilla is a great polychrest medicine, used for all types of conditions, both acute and chronic.  It is perhaps the most prescribed remedy of all for children’s illnesses.  Some key indications are: feels worse in a stuffy room, better in open air, sensitive and weepy disposition, lack of thirst, premenstrual  aggravation, desire for company, love and sympathy, and sleeping with the arms above the head. 
In Traditional Chinese Medicine, Pulsatilla is used as an anti-inflammatory and is considered a specific for amoebic and bacterial dysentery.
 
They say I’m very yielding, and changing all the time.  It’s just because I’m sensitive, and cry upon a dime.  I always like the open air, a stuffy room’s my bane.  I’m used to Chinese Medicine, but Homeopathy’s my fame.


260      
RIBES NIGRUM
 
“Black Currant”
 
Family:    Saxifragaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Volatile oil, a small amount, containing mainly terpenes.  Tannins.  Vitamin C 0.1-0.27% of fresh weight.  Flavanoids (astagalin, isoquercetin, rutin).  Oligomeric proanthyacyanidins.
 
 
Habitat:   Native of Europe and Siberia, flowers in May, indigenous to Eurasian forests as far as the Himalayas, Canada and Australia.  Found wild in the damp woods in Yorkshire and the Lake District but also found as far north as Scotland.  It’s strong perfume smell for the buds and leaves make it easily distinguishable in all seasons.
 
Origin:   Native of Europe and Siberia, indigenous to Eurasian forests as far as the Himalayas, Canada and Australia.
 
Parts Used:   Fruit, leaves, bark, root, stem, seed.
 
 
Uses:   Leaves:  Internally to increase micturation (diurectic).  Hypotensive and refrigerant.  Infusion for inflammatory conditions, sore throats and hoarseness.  Externally for treatment of wounds and insect bites.
Fruit:  Source of Vitamin C.  Diarrhea.  Preparations used on mucous membranes as a gargle for hoarseness, strep throat and other inflammations of the oral cavity. 
Anti-inflammatory, decreases prostaglandin E2 production, cardiovascular control, diuretic and diaphoretic, febrile diseases (raw juice), febrile and inflammatory disorders and in hoarseness and affections of the throat (jam or jelly).
 


261      
RICINUS  COMMUNIS
 
“Castor Bean”
 
Family:    Euphorbiaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Fixed oil, lectins, triglycerides, starch, mucilage, sugars, tocopherols
 
 
Habitat:   Found in the tropics and subtropics; temperate areas.
 
Origin:   Native to Africa, it has become naturalized in many parts of India and the temperate regions of Hawaii and the United States.  It is an annual in Canada.
 
Parts Used:   Oil extracted from the seeds.
 
 
Uses:   Commonly used as a poultice (“castor oil pack”) to relieve pain, congestion and inflammation.  It is also a cathartic, and a mild sedative.  Traditionally, it has been employed in acute constipation, intestinal inflammation, and in the removal of worms.  Castor bean is also protective to denuded skin surfaces and is useful in wound healing.
 
This plant grows as a shrub in temperate regions.  It is used mainly for the cathartic effect of its oil.  One of the constituents of the seed (Ricin) is a deadly poison; in fact, just a few beans can be fatal to an adult human!


263    
ROSMARINUS OFFICINALIS
 
“Rosemary”
 
Family:    Laminaceae or Labiatae (Mint family)
 
Active Constituents:    Phenolic acids, phenolic diterpenoids, triterpenoid acids, flavonoids, volatile oils, tannins.
 
 
Habitat:   Thrives in sunny or partially shaded areas with well-drained soil.  Typical of its Mediterranean origin, grows in dry climates with salty sea spray.
 
Origin:   Native to the Mediterranean basin and Portugal.
 
Parts Used:   Bright blue flowers, leaves and essential oil
 
 
Uses:   The essential oil is used in aromatherapy, and in many bath oils, salts and foams, where it’s calming and relaxing effects are exploited.  Also used as a tonic, stimulant, carminative for dyspepsia, headaches, nervous tension, and improving memory.  The tea is used for treatment of dyspepsia, colic, headcolds and nervous tension.  Rosemary essential oil is bactericidal and fungicidal and an antioxidant. 
In Homeopathy, Rosemary is a women’s remedy used for miscarriage and early menses, and a very chilly remedy.  As a culinary herb rosemary is a key ingredient in most mediterranean cuisine.
 
This plant was worn during exams by students in ancient Greece as a garland because it was believed to help strengthen the mind and improve the memory.  Its name in Latin means “Dew of the Sea”.  The eclectics used it mostly as a perfume in ointments.


264     
RUBUS IDAEUS
 
“Red Raspberry”
 
Family:    Rosaceae (Rose family)
 
Active Constituents:    Fragarine, flavonoids, mainly glycosides of kaempferol and quercitin, fruit sugar, volatile oils, pectin, citric acid, malic acid, many vitamins and minerals.  Leaves contain ferric citrate, tannins and anticholinesterase.
 
 
Habitat:   Found in most temperate parts of the world.  It grows in hedges, neglected fields, thickets, and hills.
 
Origin:   Indigenous to Europe and Asia.  It also grows wild and is common to Canada and the Northern United States.
 
Parts Used:   Leaves and fruit.
 
 
Uses:   Used as a uterine tonic for morning sickness, to assure early labour, to support lactation, for menstrual problems, prevention of miscarriage, early graying of hair, frequent urination, impotence and sterility, blurry vision, prevention of post-partum hemorrhage, diarrhea, canker sores, diaphoresis, colds, coughs, and difficulty breathing.


269    
RUTA GRAVEOLENS
 
“Ruta” “Rue” “Herb of Grace”  
 
Family:  Rutaceae (Citrus family)
 
Active Constituents:  Alkaloids, volatile oils, flavonoids and lignans.
 
 
Habitat:  Found in many parts of the world including (but not limited to) South Africa, Britain, Western Europe, India, China, Pakistan, Vietnam, China, Argentina, Brazil, Peru, Guatemala, Mexico, USA and Ethipia.
 
Origin:  Southern Mediterranean Europe
 
Parts Used:  Extracted oil, herbal parts (after flowering), aerial parts at the beginning of the flowering season, and the whole plant.
 
 
Uses:   Used as an antihelmintic (against worms) and for earache, stomach ache and cramps, dysmenorrhea and gastrointestinal problems. 
In Homeopathy, Ruta is mainly used for rheumatic and connective tissue complaints.  Ruta has similar affinities to Rhus-Tox (tendons, bursae, periosteum and joints) and is often given in tandem with it.  A top remedy for tendonitis, RSI (repetitive strain injury) and wrist injuries.  Also an important remedy for eye strain and blurred vision.
 
Ruta has been used since ancient times to ward off plague and pestilence; to improve eyesight; to keep away fleas and lice; and as “The Herb of Grace” used by priests in ritual sprinklings.  In Ancient Rome it was listed as a cure for no fewer than eighty-four maladies.
“Here did she drop a tear; here in this place
I’ll set a bank of rue, sour herb of grace;
Rue, even for ruth, shall shortly here be seen,
In the remembrance of a weeping queen”. 
(Shakespeare – Richard III)


272      
SALVIA OFFICINALIS
 
“Sage”
 
Family:    Laminaceae, (Mint family)
 
Active Constituents:    Volatile oils, bitters, flavonoids, phenolic acids, tannins, carotene
 
Habitat:   Thrives in sunny conditions.
 
Origin:   Native to the Mediterranean rim, now cultivated in UK and USA.
 
Parts Used:   Leaf
 
 
Uses:   Antibacterial, astringent, spamolytic.  Used for flatulence, dyspepsia and poor digestion.  Also used as a steam inhalation for sinusitis and a gargle or mouthwash for pharyngitis, stomatitits, gingivitis, uvulitis, sore gums, and mouth ulcers.  Culinary herb. 
In Asian Medicine, Sage is used for angina.
 
This herb was used by Paracelsus as a major ingredient in prescriptions for longevity and “elixirs of life”.  It was regarded as a rejuvenating tonic.  Ancient Egyptians used it as a fertility drug.  Its name derives from the Latin salvere, to “save” or to “cure”.  Its common name means “wise”; it has been used as a brain tonic for centuries and is believed to enhance mental and spiritual clarity. 


273    
SAMBUCUS CANADENSIS
 
“American Elderberry”, “Elder”
 
Family:  Caprifoliceae (Honeysuckle family)
 
Active Constituents:  Flavonoids (including rutin and quercitin), tannins, mucilage, essential oils (including terpenes), cyanogenic glycoside (sambunigrin, an isomer of prunasin), alkaloid (sambucin), potassium nitrate, and resin.  Solvent: water
 
 
Habitat:  Low damp grounds, thickets and waste places.  Frequently cultivated for their ornamental foliage.  Usually grows up to 5-12 feet in height.
 
Origin:  An indigenous shrub growing in all parts of the United States and Canada.  Sambucus nigra, the European Elder, is a close relative with very similar properties. 
 
Parts Used:  Roots, inner bark, leaves, berries and flowers.
 
 
Uses:   Sambucus Canadensis has been widely used as a cold and flu remedy often combined with peppermint as a tea or made into concentrated medicinal syrups.  The fruit is cooked for jellies and in pies and is also used to make elderberry wine.  In manufacturing, the extracts of the American Elder flower are used in perfume. 
In Native American Indian traditions, Elder was also used as a poultice for many skin eruptions and injuries, it was often placed on the newborn’s navel.
 
This shrub has various colored berries – green when unripe changing to red, reddish brown, purple and black, which can be used to make jams, pies and wines, and was believed to be an abode of witches in the earlier centuries.  It was considered a good charm, to drive away robbers and snakes.  Its diaphoretic and alterative properties make it an excellent remedy for colds, flus and  fevers.


275    
SANGUINARIA CANADENSIS
 
“BloodRoot”
 
Family:    Papaveraceae (Poppy Family)
 
Active Constituents:    Isoquinoline alkaloids.  Protoberberine alkaloids: berberine, coptisine.
 
 
Habitat:   Bloodroot is found in woodlands, shelter and leaf mold aid its survivial.
 
Origin:   North Eastern United States.
 
Parts Used:   Root
 
 
Uses:   Native American Indians used bloodroot for rheumatism, asthma, lung ailments and fevers.  Also as a topical wart treatment.
In Folk Medicine bloodroot was used in many cough syrups and appetite enhancing preparations. 
In Phytopharmacy the alkaloid sanguinarine has been investigated for promising anti-tumor activity.  Also for its anaesthetic and anti-septic properties (it appears in plaque-inhibiting anti-bacterial mouthwashes).
In Homeopathy Sanguinaria is an important remedy for headaches which settle in around the right eyeball and orbit. Also an important remedy for whooping cough, deep retching coughs, and polyps.
 
The root of this North American herb contains a red-coloured juice, which flows out when the root is cut. It was extensively used by the Native Americans as a dye, cough medicine, “snuff for polyps”, and had many dermatological applications on cuts, sores, warts and tumors.  Current research in preliminary studies in cervical cancer and HIV therapy.


282      
SCROPHULARIA NODOSA
 
“Figwort” “Heal-All” “Throat Wort”
 
Family:    Scrophulariaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Mucilage, iridoids, saponins, caffeic acid derivatives, flavonoids, and invert sugar.
 
 
Habitat:   Wet or damp places, in open woodlands, and riverbanks, also found along ditches.
 
Origin:   Indigenous to Europe, Central Asia and North America.
 
Parts Used:   Aerial parts or roots are utilized.
 
 
Uses:   This herb is largely used as a relaxant, moderate stimulant and demulcent.  As an ointment it services burns, inflammation, sore nipples, ulcers, ringworm, eczema, psoriasis, eruptions, earache and hemorrhoids.  Figwort is a mild diuretic/laxative, thus, supports detoxification of body. Other usages of this herb include digestive disorders and stimulation of the heart.
Homeopathically indications include: enlarged glands, skin problems specifically eczema in and around the ears, as well as a weak sinking feeling in the pit of the chest.
 
The Latin name of this herb is an antiquated term for cervical tuberculous lymphadenitis.  Homeopathically, this patient will se spots, be drowsy before and after meals, and be worse in the morning, with deep breathing, and studying!


293     
SOLANUM DULCAMARA
 
“Dulcamara” “Woody Nightshade”
“Bittersweet”
 
Family:    Solanaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Steroidal alkaloids- soladulcamaridine, soladulcidine, solanidine, solasodine, tomatidine, B-solamarine; Steroidal saponins-tigogenin, yamogenin, furastanol glycosides including solamayocinosides A-F.
 
 
Habitat:   It is a sprawling, irregular, slender perennial vine that can be found climbing on trees, hedges, thickets and fences, especially in moist places. 
 
Origin:   From Europe and Asia, now naturalized in America
 
Parts Used:   Twigs, root, bark.
 
Uses:   In Homeopathy, suspect Dulcamara if a condition begins with damp chill, or when the weather has changed from warm to cool.  Very commonly indicated in hayfever, sinusitis, warts, herpes and rheumatic pains.  Used as a botanical remedy for syphilitic conditions, leprosy, tetter, eczema, scrofula, and for rheumatic and cachetic affections. 
Historically it was used extensively for sores and swellings, especially felons (inflammation around the fingernails), rheumatic and cutaneous conditions, epistaxis, asthma and bronchitis, to stimulate the immune system. 
It is used Externally for herpes, chronic eczema, furuncles, warts, abscesses and contusions.
 
This common weedy plant was originally identified by Galen in A.D. 150 as a treatment for tumors, cancer and warts.  It was known to old herbalists as a useful treatment for skin conditions, which have root in the lymph and blood.  Its most important use today is in homeopathy where it is the remedy for many conditions that come on as a result of the weather changing, or from exposure to damp.


302      
SYMPHYTUM OFFICINALE
 
“Comfrey” “Bone-Knit”
 
Family:    Boraginaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Pyrrolizidine alkaloids, gums, mucilage, sitosterol, saponins, allantoin, carotene, potassium, calcium, magnesium, iron, phosphorus, vitamins A, C, B12, protein
 
 
Habitat:   Thrives in moist, marshy places
 
Origin:   Native to Europe and UK but grows in all temperate regions of the world:  Western Asia, North America, Australia.
 
Parts Used:   Leaf, root
 
 
Uses:   In Folk Medicine:  has a long and rich history of use as a wound-healing herb par excellence, promoting healing of bruises, ulcers, broken bones, sprains, and cracked skin.  Often macerated leaves are applied as a poultice.  Taken internally, caution must be exercised due to alkaloids which are toxic to the liver (especially high in the root). 
In Homeopathy, symphytum is considered “the arnica of the eyeball”, used in cases of direct injury to the eye.   Also frequently given in potency to promote bone repair after a fracture.
 
In Latin, its name derives from confirma, meaning with strength.  In Greek, the name derives from symphytos, to unite.  Throughout history it has been one of the most widely used vulnerary (wound-healing) herbs of all.


306    
TANACETUM PARTHENIUM
 
“Feverfew” “Pyrethrum”
 
Family:    Asteraceae (Compositae)
 
Active Constituents:    Sesquiterpene lactones, monterpene volatile oils, sesquiterpene derivative volatile oils, pyretrin, flavanoids.
 
 
Habitat:     Naturalized throughout Europe and North, Central and South America
 
Origin:   The Balkans Peninsula
 
Parts Used:   Aerial parts and leaves
 
 
Uses:   Feverfew was used by Eclectics for migraine prophylaxis, as an antithrombotic and an anti-inflammatory.  It is a tonic, carminative, emmenagogue, vermifuge and stimulant. 
In Folk Medicine it is used for fever, headache, migraine, threatened miscarriage, labour difficulties, menstrual irregularities, toothache, gastric upset and insect bites. 
In Modern Phytopharmacy, Feverfew is currently a top selling remedy for migraine and other congestive headaches.  Feverfew is highly variable in appearance and in concentration of active principles, making standardization very critical.  Contraindicated in pregnancy, and for children under age two.
 
Commonly used for fevers, headaches, migraines, and menstrual irregularities.  Studies in Britain suggest up to 70% of migraines could be successfully controlled with this herb.


308    
TARAXACUM OFFICINALE
 
“Dandelion” “Dent-de-Lion”
 “Fairy Clock”
 
Family:    Asteraceae (Compositae)
 
Active Constituents:    Bitter glycosides, triterpenoids, tannins, inulin, potassium salts, vitamin A, B complex, zinc, manganese, copper, flavonoid glycosides, chlorogenic acid, and caffeic acid.
 
Habitat:   Found in Europe and is naturalized in North America.  Mostly found in the northern hemisphere but can be found in most parts of the world.
 
Origin:   Perhaps Greece, but may have originated in northern Europe and northern Asia.
 
Parts Used:   Roots and leaves.
 
Uses:   Used as a mild laxative and diuretic as well as a cholagogue (stimulator of bile flow), antirheumatic, anti-inflammatory, a general stimulant for the urinary system, hypoglycemic, anti-tumor and to stimulate milk production. 
The Eclectics use Taraxacum for loss of appetite, weak digestion, hepatic torpor and constipation.   
Traditionally, it hs been used for treating arthritic and rheumatic complaints, eczema and other skin conditions.  It is also an ingredient of many popular Native American “bitters” and “blood purifiers”. 
In Asian Medicine it is used in treatments designed to eliminate heat and toxins in the blood when there is a liver involvement (as in jaundice and hepatitis, for example).  
As an Edible the leaf is collected for salads and the dried and powdered root is a well-known coffee substitute.  Leaves are very nutritious; high in Vit. A, Vit. C, and potassium.
 
 The common name for Taraxacum originates from the French words for “tooth of the lion” which refers to the large, pointed teeth of the leaves.  It can be found throughout North America and is generally considered a common weed. It’s diuretic action accounts for the common names “Pissenlit” and “Wet-a-bed”.
 


310      
THYMUS VULGARIS
 
“Common Thyme”  “French Thyme”
 
Family:    Laminaceae (Mint family)
 
Active Constituents:    Volatile oils (predominantly the phenols thmyol and carvacrol), phenylpropanoids, triterpines, flavanoids, dimethylbiphenyl and tannins.  There are many sub-types and cultivars of thyme, with varying constituents and medicinal activity.
 
 
Habitat:   Cultivated worldwide.
 
Origin:   Mediterranean Europe.
 
Parts Used:   Leaves and flowering tops (orally) and the oil extracted from them (topically).  The oil, when used topically, should be diluted with another carrier oil.  Taken orally as a tea or infusion.
 
 
Uses:   Thymus is used as a stomachic, carminative, antispasmodic, anthelmintic, antiseptic, antifungal and antibacterial.  It is used to treat spasmodic conditions including digestive upset (flatulence, colic, dyspepsia), upper respiratory tract conditions (asthma, hay fever, bronchitis, whooping cough).  It is used topically for toothaches, rheumatic aches and pains, fungal and parasitic conditions.
 
This well-known culinary and medicinal herb may be found in your garden.  One of the classic herbs of French cuisine, integral to the “boquet garni” a classic trio of flavors – thyme, parsley, and bay leaf. 
 


311      
THUJA OCCIDENTALIS
 
“White Cedar” “Northern White Cedar” “Arbor Vitae” “Tree of Life” “Swamp Cedar”
 
Family:    Cupressaceae (Cypress Family)
 
Active Constituents:    Thujone, Fenchone,  Polysaccharides, Camphor, Tannin, several acids (acetic, formic, isovaleric, valerianic).  The essential oil content decreases with the age of the tree.
 
 
Habitat:   Thuja occidentalis prefers a relatively humid environment, with an average precipitation of 28-46 inches/year.  Thuja grows best in cool temperatures in a moderately short growing season, in swamps and cool, rocky woods.  It does not grow well in extremely dry soils.
 
Origin:   Native to the United States and Canada.
 
Parts Used:   Fresh leaves and twigs.
 
 
Uses:   In Folk Medicine, cedar leaf oil has been orally used as an immune stimulant, expectorant, and diuretic.  Topically, cedar leaf oil is used to treat skin diseases, condyloma, cancers, as an insect repellent, and as a wart treatment.  Leaves are rich in Vitamin C.
In Native American traditions, the leaves and twigs provide oil to treat malaria, coughs, gout and rheumatism. 
In Homeopathy, Thuja is a well-known remedy.  Some key symptoms are: sensation of fragility, of something alive or moving in the abdomen, multiple spreading warts, polyps, sweet or honey smelling sweat, low self-esteem, and bad effects from vaccination.
 
In homeopathic potencies, pathologies of the sycotic miasm – growths and tumours, chronic sinus and respiratory pathology, and genital disorders correspond to this homeopathic remedy, the most frequently prescribed tree remedy.


312    
TRIFOLIUM PRATENSE
 
“Red Clover”
 
Family:    Fabaceae (Legume family)
 
Active Constituents:    Isoflavones including genistein, daidzein, biochanin, formononetin; phenolic glycosides, salicylates, cyanogenic glycosides, coumarins, mineral acids.
 
 
Habitat:   Grows in pastures and fields all across North America
 
Origin:   Native plant to North America, Europe and temperate regions of Asia and Africa and is naturalized in many other parts of the world.
 
Parts Used:   Leaves and flowers (dried and fresh flower heads) when plant is in bloom from July through September.
 
 
Uses:   Traditionally used as a “blood purifier”, flowers have been smoked in “anti-asthma cigarettes”.  Used in chronic skin conditions, i.e., eczema and psoriasis, whooping cough, inflammations associated with arthritis and gout, dry cough, and for re-establishing hormone balance.  Perhaps its best known use today is as an anti-cancer agent, where it is employed in many formulations including the well known Hoxsey treatment.
 
This common flower is easily identified by the pink, red, or purple flower heads and the “V” pattern on the leaves.  It grows in fields and pastures all across North America.  It is one of nature’s riches sources of isoflavones, the most estrogenically active of all phytoestrogens. 


322    
URTICA URENS/DIOICA
 
“Dwarf Nettle”, “Stinging Nettle”
 
Family:  Urticaceae
 
Active Constituents:  Flowering palnt contains formic acid, ammonia, carbonic acid, mucilage, chlorophyll, glucoquinone, iron, vitamins C and A, calcium, protein, fibre, flavonoids and ketones.
 
Habitat:  Deep soils rich in nitrogen, bottoms of ditches, among briars and in shaded valleys, where soil is loamy.
 
Origin:  Temperate regions North America, Europe, Asia, Japan, South Africa, Australia and the Andes.
 
Parts Used:  Herb (dried and fresh), seed and root
 
Uses:   As a Nutritious Food, neetle is often gathered for soups and steamed greens.  Rich in minerals, flavonoids, chlorophyll and vitamins A & C, it has a reputation as a nutritive for convalescing patients and nursing mothers. 
In current Naturopathic practice it is prescribed in freeze-dried preparation as a herbal anti-histamine for hay fever and allergic urticaria.  Preparations of the root show promise in the treatment of benign prostatic hypertrophy.
In Homeopathic medicine, it is used for conditions of the skin that are characterized by a burning or stinging sensation, including urticaria, burns, eczema, insect bites, stings, chicken pox, bruises and nettle rash.  It is also a very important remedy for problems which occur during weaning. 
In Folk Medicine nettle has long been used for relief of arthritis and gout.
 
When the Romans were numbed by the cold during their invasion of England, they flailed themselves with this herb to restore circulation.  The young leaves of this plant have been used in the making of beer, while the juice has been used for waterproofing wood. 
“Tender-handed stroke a nettle
And it stings you for your pains
Grasp it like a man of mettle
And it soft as silk remains”.


324      
VACCINIUM MYRTILLUS
 
“Bilberry”
 
Family:    Ericaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Flavonoid compounds, Anthyocyanosides; Tannins; Cafferic Acid & Phenolic Acid; Pectins.
 
 
Habitat:   Bilberry is found growing in the woods and in forest meadows.
 
Origin:   It is found in Central & Northern Europe, Asia and, North America.
 
Parts Used:   Dried leaves, ripe dried fruit, ripe fresh fruit.
 
 
Uses:   Bilberry is often used for cataracts, as an antimicrobial agent, and in arthritis.  It has also been used in cases of diarrhea and dysentery.  Bilberry lowers blood sugar levels as in Diabetes Mellitus, and it lowers “bad” cholesterol in the blood. 
In Homeopathy, Bilberry treats vaccinosis, malaria, diarrhea, and dysentery.
In Asia Medicine, Bilberry softens deposits, promotes cleansing and urination and benefits the vision.  It also benefits and cools the skin.
 
Use my leaves or my fruit
For diarrhea, I will suit
Blood sugar, I can lower
And glaucoma will develop slower.
 
I am taken by pilots before they fly
To improve visual acuity of the night sky.
To prevent platelets from sticking
My berries are good for the picking.


325     
VALERIANA OFFICINALIS
 
“Valerian”
 
Family:    Valerianaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Alkaloids, iridoids, volatile oils, amino acids, phenylpropanoids, sequiterpenoids.
 
 
Habitat:   Temperate climate; moist medium or sandy loam soil.
 
Origin:   Europe, North Asia
 
Parts Used:   Root and rhizome
 
 
Uses:   Galen, the Greek physician and pharmacist, was likely the first to describe the sedative qualities of Valerian for which it is known today.  Valerian tea and tincture were considered anodyne, carminative, antispasmodic, nervine and hypnotic.  It has been historically used for relief of stress, muscle spasms, mental depression and despondency, migraine, stomach cramps, fatigue and nervous conditions in general.  William Hufeland recommended Valerian for “chronic weakness of the nerves”.  Today, it is a leading over-the-counter tranquilizer and sleep aid in Europe. 
In Homeopathy Valerian is indicated for states of hysteria, nervousness and hypersensitivity.
 
“Throughout many temperate areas my tall stems can be seen.  Don’t let the delicate flowers fool you, my medicinal powers are volatile, strong and keen.  You may know me by “all-heal”, “amantilla” or “capons tail” to name but a few, but my smell when dried, you won’t forget as you remark “phew”.  With my roots in your pocket you’ll attract cats, but repel rats.  In a tincture or a capsule, I can help you relax or take a nap…”


328      
VERBASCUM THAPSUS
 
“Mullein”
 
Family:    Scrophulariaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Mucilage, irdoids, saponins, caffeic acid derivatives, flavonoids, and invert sugar.
 
 
Habitat:   Found in Europe, Asia and North America, growing in open fields and pastures.  Mullein can thrive in full sun and in poor soil.
 
Origin:   Native to central, eastern, and southern Europe, Asia Minor, North Africa and Ethiopia.
 
Parts Used:   Yellow flowers, leaves and roots.
 
 
Uses:   Traditionally Mullein is used for hemorrhoids, gout, painful urination, coughs, dysentery, tuberculosis, earache, and deafness.  Mullein is primarily used in the form of a tea for the treatment of coughs, bronchitis, and other respiratory tract conditions.  Mullein flowers soaked in olive or other oil is used topically for the treatment of ear infections, as well as for various swellings and skin rashes. 
In Homeopathy, Mullein remedy is used for symptoms of facial pain (trigeminal neuralgia) and ear infections.
 
This “weed” can be found growing abundantly all over North America – along roadsides, pastures and fields.  Its demulcent, emollient and antispasmodic actions make it an excellent natural remedy for upper respiratory tract issues (such as cough and asthma), as well as ear infections.  It was referred to as “big tobacco” by the Navajo Indians, since the leaves were mixed with tobacco and smoked to sooth sore throats.


339      
WITHANIA SOMNIFERA
 
“Withania” “Ashwagandha” “Indian ginseng”
 
Family:    Solanaceae
 
Active Constituents:    Roots contain alkaloids, essential oils, sucrose and starches. Leaves contain steroidal lactones, glucosides, amino acids, tannins and flavonoids.  This plant is also rich in iron.
 
Habitat:   Withania grows wild in drier and sub-tropical regions and wastelands up to 1500m.
 
Origin:   Withania is widely distributed throughout India’s drier regions, extending into the Himalayas. It is also found growing wild in Pakistan, Afghanistan, Africa, Middle Eastern and Mediterranean countries.  Although not heavily cultivated in North and South America, Withania has been introduced to these areas with much success due to its hardy nature.
 
Parts Used:   Leaves and roots are primarily used for medicinal purposes.  The plant’s seeds, shoots and juice are used mainly in food preparations.
 
Uses:   The root has traditionally been used as a strengthening tonic and aphrodisiac.  It is taken internally for tuberculosis, general debility, nervous exhaustion, loss of memory and emaciation.  Roots are applied externally to ulcers and rheumatic swellings.  Powdered root is traditionally mixed with ghee or honey for impotence or seminal debility.  The seeds are used as a diuretic and to coagulate milk.  Leaves are used as an anthelmintic and applied with warm castor oil to carbuncles, inflammation and swellings.
 
In India, the common name of this plant refers to its pungent smell, literally translated as “the smell and strength of a horse.”  Lesotho natives take a decoction of the root for colds and chills and use an infusion of the bark for asthma and as a topical for bedsores.  The Zulu give an enema of the decorticated root to feverish infants.  Tangayikans use the root as a sexual stimulant and to induce labour.  The Masai use the juice of the leaf for conjunctivitis.
 
